Newsgroups: sci.med.nutrition
From: altar@beaufort.sfu.ca (Ted Wayn Altar)

>Michael Traub wrote:
> B12 deficiency is more common in omnivores than in vegans.

>Martin Hulsey replied:
> Do you have a peer-reviewed reference from a bona fide nutrition 
> journal that says this?  I have a couple that say quite the opposite.


FACTORS THAT AFFECT DIETARY B12 NEEDS

     (1). Meat or other animal products and refined carbohydrates
          (sugars) when used generously may more than double B12
          needs.

     (2).  Persons who use drugs, chemical, or beverages which
          destroy B12 (e.g., tobacco, alcohol, caffeine, etc.)

     (3).  Megadoses of vitamin C may produce B12 deficiency by
          destroying the cobalamins during transport through the
          gastrointestinal tract (Hines, 1975).  Quantities more
          than 1/2 of a gram can destroy 50% to 95% of B12 in
          the food.

     (4).  Oral contraceptives are used (affects the B12 binders
          of the blood).

     (5).  egg albumin and egg yolk decreases B12 absorption

     (6) intestinal parasitism (e.g., tapeworms) and explosively
         growing bacterial floras can effectively compete with
         the host for the vitamin

times greater than our actual requirement).

It has been reported that B12 is to be found on the roots and
stems of tomatoes, cabbage, celery, kale, broccoli, and leeks.
Victor Herbert, however, found that "well washed" plant foods
contain no B12 except for trace amounts in some rhibozium-
bacteria-containing root nodules.

     ". . . vegetarians appear to "undergo physiological
     adaptation enabling them to make somewhat better utilization
     of iron than would be expected from iron bioavailability
     studies involving the feeding of vegetarian diets to
     omnivores or involving the testing of particular components
     characteristic of vegetarian diets with omnivore subjects."
          (from Kies & McEndree "Vegetarianism and the
           bioavailability of iron" in Kies (ed.) NUTRITIONAL
           BIOAVAILABILITY OF IRON, 1982).

ARE ADULT VEGANS AT A GREATER RISK OF B12 DEFICIENCY?

of an omnivorous control group, hematologic evidence of vitamin
B12 deficiency is not present.

As Gill Langely reports:

    levels of the vitamin, while VEGAN MACROBIOTICS OR SMOKERS
    MAY BE PREDISPOSED TO B12 DEFICIENCY.

    of haemoglobin in the blood.

    food fortified with the vitamin, and those who did had higher
    amounts in their blood.  THE SERUM LEVELS OF THREE SUBJECTS
    WHO HAD BEEN VEGAN FOR 6-13 YEARS (LONG ENOUGH THEORETICALLY
    TO EXHAUST LIVER STORES OF B12) WITH NO OBVIOUS DIETARY
    SOURCE OF B12 WERE ALSO ADEQUATE, at 120-230pg/ml.  All the
    vegans were healthy, none showed symptoms of B12 deficiency
    and all had normal haemoglobin values.  The same report lists
    other surveys of vegans which have failed to show symptoms of
    dietary deficiency of B12.  [emphasis his]


Of course, people will cite some case studies of some unfortunate
vegans but such case studies are limited in that we don't have a
proper comparison with non-vegans and by now it should be
apparent that many other causes besides dietary deficiency can be
at fault.  If one looks at these case studies closely, the
individuals are often reported as having other deficiencies
thereby undermining the very point that such cases might thought
to have illustrated in the first place.

What is interesting is that B12 is so extremely rare that even
single case studies get published, but the generalizability of
such case-studies to the general population of vegans is not to
automatically be undertaken.  More evidence than this is needed,
especially when the confound of physiological
aborption/utilization problems are often not properly ruled out
in these case studies.


CAUSE FOR VEGAN PANIC?

known causes of malabsorption are a lack of intrinsic factor
(e.g., due to pernicious anemia, destruction of gastric mucosa,
etc.), removal or disease of the second portion of the ileum,
competition for B12 by microorganisms or intestinal parasites,
toxic substances, etc.

still, if one has an absorption, loss, or increase need problem,
then presumably when little B12 is available in the diet then
still less is going to be assimilated.  now, what can vegans do
to prevent a B12 deficiency?



HOW VEGANS MIGHT INCREASE THEIR B12 INTAKES

Since B12 is predominantly produced by bacteria (no animal
produces its own), then foods grown in soils where the bacteria
flora is rich would presumable have more B12 on their surface.
Hence, organically grown foods will probably be richer in B12.

TAKING SUPPLEMENTS.

all investigators reporting on vegans report them as being above
average in health and more active.


FINAL WORD:


REFERENCES 1: General

Abdulla et al. (1981).  Nutrient intake and health status of
    vegans Chemical analyses of diets using the duplicate portion
    sampling technique.  AM. J. CLIN. NUTR., 34:2464-77.

Herbert, V. (1962).  Harmful B12 breakdown products in
    multivitamins?  MEDICAL WORLD NEWS, (Sept. 28):12-13.

Herbert, V. (1973).  The five possible causes of all nutrient
    deficiency: Illustrated by deficiencies of vitamin B12 and
    folic acid.  AMER. J. OF CLIN. NUTRITION, 26:77.

 Herbert, V. (1988).  Vitamin B12: plant sources, requirements,
    and assay.  AMER. J. OF CLINICAL NUTRITION, 48(3):852.

Hines, J. (1975).  Ascorbic acid and vitamin B12 deficiency.  J.
    OF AMER. MED. ASSOC., 234(1):24.

Thrash & Thrash (1982).  NUTRITION FOR VEGETARIANS, 1982.

    NUTRITION, 56(3):555.

Sanders & Purves (1981).  An anthropometric and dietary
    assessment of nutritional status of vegan preschoold
    children. J. HUM. NUTR., 35:349-57.

Sanders et al. (1987).  Blood pressure, plasma renin activity and
    aldosterone concentration in vegans and omnivore controls.
    Hum. Nutr.: Appl. Nutr., 41A:204-11

Smith (1962).  Veganism, a clincal survey with observations of
    vitamin B12 metabolism.  THE BRIT. MED. J, 1(June 16):1655.

Wokes et al. (1955).  "Human dietary deficiency of vitamin B12.
    THE AMER. J. OF CLIN. NUTR., 3(5):375